@@ version 1; date 2012.2.14.19.29.55; author 69.207.159.80;
Describe Extraverted sensation vs Extraverted intution here.

The Extraverted Sensation Function in Action

I have used this example in one of my previous threads and I will now use it for this article with great refinement.

Let’s say that we have an Extraverted Sensation user in a forest. This forest has many trees, blue skies and clouds, humid and warm air, and a lot of vegetation growth.
---

The Se user utilizes his sight. He sees trees, the sky, clouds, green fauna. There is no hidden interpretation. What is seen is the only fact.

He utilizes his smell. It’s fresh. There are strong scent of rotting wood and soil. He doesn’t think much about it except that it’s a fact that is what is there.

He utilizes his touch. He feels the moment. It’s warm and humid. He feels the texture of trees and other plants. There is no meaning behind this. It’s just fact that these objects give off these impressions

He utilizes his hearing. He hears the whistling of wind. The birds chirping. Leaves rustling. No meaning. Just the fact that these sounds are occuring.

He utilizes his taste. The air tasted with wetness. He accepts this as fact and does not care for other irrelevant meanings other than the actual reality.

To the Se user, this experience is not about being magical. It is not about being mystical. It is not about being special. It is not about being pleasurable. It is nothing more than a fact that there are things all around him. What things are as they are at the present moment is the only thing the Se user cares about. It’s beautiful? Who cares, irrelevant to the reality. It’s mysterious? Not a concern to the objective reality of what’s there. No other useless meanings will be associated with these objective data of what we are seeing at the very moment other than what we preceive with the five senses. That is the workings of the Extraverted Sensation function as defined by C.G. Jung.


Let’s compare and contrast this to the Ne user

In the same setting conditions, we now throw the Ne user into the forest. 

The Ne user also experiences the present moment. Like the Se user, he also becomes caught in the moment of all things around him. Like the Se user, he also comes interested in his surrounding. Like the Se user, he is also bouncing around, taking in all as much as he can, as many external data as possible. On estimation, it could be said that 80% of the Ne function is extremely similar to the Se function. They share so many commonalities that we are often confusing Ne for Se and Se for Ne. Now you may wonder, what’s the 20% that sets them apart?

The difference between the Se and the Ne function is that the Se is more focused on the actualized reality. They are concerned with what is only there. Any attempt to attach interpretations to them is irrelevant, subjective, and nonsensical. The Ne function is not concerned with what is actually there. They are more concerned with what these objects may mean. They attach interpretations upon interpretations upon the object, seeking possibilities and paradigm.

So, an Ne user in the forest would take in all the experiences of the present moment and have a “hunch”. To the Ne user, based on what is seen, heard, felt, smell, and taste, it probably rains in the forest often. It appears to be sunny at the time, but based on what was seen in the evironment, the Ne user could not help but have this strange hunch that this forest must have a lot of rain. He may also begin to branch off and develop even more possibilities of what may go on in the forest. Possibilities upon possibilities. The Ne user is aware of the reality of what is going on, but he does not care about the reality. He is only concerned with continually seeking the unknown.

The Ne user may say something along the lines of this. They may continually build possibilities and relate/connect patterns seen across time:
“These tree leaves are similar to tree leaves in another forest I know and it rains there a lot. I can’t help but feel it probably rains here too, because I notice that the patterns of these tree leaves are very similar to what I have seen before in another forest. The soil also have “patterns” that are similar to the other forest for rain as well as various other things in this forest to the other forest.”

The Se user, however, would state more along the lines of the following:
"There are trees, soil, blue skies, some clouds, humid air, etc. They are just there as they are. Any attempt to reinterpret what these things are or mean is irrelevant and useless to the reality of what it is we physically interpret with our five senses. It looks like it rains here a lot? Irrelevant. It's not raining right now. Things right now are things just are. That is the hard fact. I will only determine that it rains here often when I see it for myself with my own two eyes."
