@@ version 1; date 2003.9.6.21.57.23; author ;
What does Lenore meaning by "Feeling"?

What is the difference between [[Extraverted Feeling]] and [[Introverted Feeling]]?

= As a [[Semiotic Attitude]]: Signs are meaningful only insofar as they relate to needs =

Emotions are the expression of whether a person's needs are being met or not.  Signs of emotion are thus the truest and most important signs, because they relate to the most important matters.

Fe: Every need relates a person to part of the socially shared world, at a specific time and place.  For example, "I need you to cook dinner tonight."  A need makes you part of the world outside yourself rather than a self-contained entity.  It gives you a stake in the social arena.

Everything that a person says or does expresses a choice about ''who'' he has common bonds with: where that person's life is embedded.  "Life is with people."

A person declares his loyalties via ''arbitrary'' behaviors: behaviors that show that he is not merely pursuing his needs on his own, just efficient means to an end, but that his needs overlap with specific other people.  Through arbitrary behaviors whose meaning derives from shared social convention, you cast your lot with others.  Your fate is intrinsically bound to the fate of those for whom you have feelings.

Fi: A need exists entirely within the person.  For example, "I need food" or "I need companionship".  It can be met in an infinity of different ways.  I might get food and companionship from having you cook dinner for me tonight, but I might get my needs met in other ways, too.  A need and its conditions of fulfillment are completely different things.

Everything that a person says or does expresses his unique needs and callings.  These needs and callings are intrinsic to the person.  They are not embedded in or related to the world outside him, though whether they are met or not might depend on his surroundings.  "We are in the world but not of the world."

Each living being expresses its needs differently, but the needs themselves are universally understandable.  We understand the signs that others give off via empathy: by tapping into that universal vocabulary through which we can understand their need as if it were our own.  We do this by abstracting out the differences of background and environment that cause the same needs to be expressed differently.

----

Judaism would seem to be an Fe religion while Christianity is an Fi religion.

Judaism is about a "chosen people".  It's one tribe, a big family in a world that contains many families.  In practice, the religion consists primarily of rituals through which people transmit practical wisdom about getting along in the world with others (the Fe view of ethics), and indicate that they cast their lot with the Jewish people.

Christianity is about God's unconditional love for all his children.  There is only one family, and it includes everyone.  Christianity focuses on getting in touch with God, doing good works only because they are good, and thereby transcending all divisions of tribe and family.
@@ version 2; date 2003.9.7.18.37.5; author ;
@@d1
@@i2
What does [[Lenore]] meaning by "Feeling"?
@@d21
@@i22
= Judaism and Christianity =
